Client MUST send empty Certificate message (#4)
jhoyla/draft-jhoyla-req-mtls-flag: draft-jhoyla-req-mtls-flag.md

--- abstract

Normally in TLS there is no way for the client to signal to the server that it
supports client authentication and will handle a CertificateRequest gracefully.
This document defines a TLS Flag {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tlsflags}} that enables clients
to provide this hint.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document specifies a TLS Flag that allows a client to attempt to negotiate
mutually authenticated TLS (in at least some cases). Sometimes a server does not
want to authenticate every client, but might wish to authenticate a subset of
them. In TLS 1.3 this may be done with post-handshake auth, however this adds an

> extra round-trip, and requires negotiation at the application layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extra round trip, and requires negotiation at the application layer.
```

that are directly operated by (human) users. Clients that set this flag SHOULD
only do so when a client certificate is directly available to them, and MUST NOT
prompt the user or take actions that would prompt the user for example trying to
read certificates from off-board devices such as smart cards.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Flag specification

The `request_mtls` flag is sent by the client in the `ClientHello` message,
and, if accepted by the server, acknowledged in the server's
`CertificateRequest` message. A server that receives this flag and wishes to
accept the extension MUST send a `CertificateRequest` message with the TLS
Flags extension, and with the `request_mtls` flag set. The server MAY send a
`CertificateRequest` message without the `request_mtls` flag set if it wishes
to negotiate client authentication for another reason. The client sending this
flag MUST send a `Certificate` message if it receives a `CertificateRequest`
with the `request_mtls` flag set, even if said `Certificate` message is empty,
and SHOULD NOT preemptively terminate the connection anticipating a

> "certificate_required" alert.

Reviewer: It looks like the server can actually _offer_ TLS flags in CR: https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-tls-tlsflags-15.html#section-3-4

In this case it might not be a good idea to ack the client's offer in CR as well.

In any case, I'm a little wary of this draft mandating where a server implementation chooses to acknowledge TLS Flags. The more flexible we can be, the less likely it is for this flag to complicate the implementation of other flags.

Author: Added new language to that effect.

Author: This is specified on line 115:
```diff
-* Message shall be CH
+* Message shall be CH, CR
```
Standing for `ClientHello` and `CertificateRequest` respectively.

--- abstract

Normally in TLS there is no way for the client to signal to the server that it
supports client authentication and will handle a `CertificateRequest`
gracefully. This document defines a TLS Flag that enables clients to provide
this hint.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document specifies a TLS Flag {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tlsflags}} that allows a

> client to attempt to negotiate mutually authenticated TLS (in at least some
> cases). Sometimes a server does not want to authenticate every client, but

Reviewer: Along the lines of avoiding the term "request mutual TLS", we might rewrite this as
```suggestion
client to prompt the server to request a certificate during the handshake. Sometimes a server does not want to authenticate every client, but
```

post-handshake authentication, however this adds an extra round trip, and
requires negotiation at the application layer.

The behaviour specified in {{?RFC8446}} for a client that receives a
`CertificateRequest` that it cannot satisfy is to send an empty Certificate
message followed by a `Finished` message. However in practice many clients
simply terminate the connection in anticipation of a "certificate_required"
alert.

This behaviour makes it difficult for servers to send `CertificateRequest`
messages in the wild. A client sending the `request_client_auth` flag in the
`ClientHello` allows the server to request authentication during the initial
handshake only when it receives a hint the client will handle the request
without terminating the connection, and, if unable to authenticate, by sending
an empty certificate message, per {{?RFC8446, Section 4.4.2}}. This enables a
number of use cases, for example allowing bots to authenticate themselves when
mixed in with general traffic.

This flag is intended to be used by clients sending automated traffic, not
those that are directly operated by (human) users. Clients that set this flag

> SHOULD only do so when a client certificate is directly available to them, and

Reviewer: A bit nit-picky, but: what does "directly available" mean? A bot might still need to select a cert based on the contents of the CR.

Author: The goal is to make it clear that you shouldn't set this flag if you aren't certain you have at least one certificate available. You don't want the client to start trying to enumerate keys on a smartcard or prompting the user for a PEM file. This is only supposed to be used if you already know what certificate(s) you have available.

`CertificateRequest` includes a `certificate_authorities` extension or
`signature_algorithms` extension that the client cannot satisfy.

A server receiving the `request_client_auth` flag in a `ClientHello` message
that wishes to accept the flag MUST echo the `request_client_auth` flag in the
`CertificateRequest` message. This informs the client that the reason for the
`CertificateRequest` was because of the `request_client_auth` flag and not due
to some other policy. This allows clients to select certificates based on
whether the server accepted the flag or not.

A server MUST NOT set the `request_client_auth` flag in the
`CertificateRequest` unless it received the flag in the `ClientHello`. A client
receiving the `request_client_auth` flag that did not set it in the
`ClientHello` MUST generate a fatal `illegal_parameter` alert.

A client that receives this flag in any message other than `CertificateRequest`
MUST terminate the connection with a fatal `illegal_parameter` alert. Similarly
a server that receives this flag in any message other than `ClientHello` MUST
terminate the connection with a fatal `illegal_parameter` alert.

# Security Considerations

> This flag should have no effect on the security of TLS, as the server may

Reviewer: This is interesting because even if the flag on its own has no security impact, the use case we intend to support here -- web bot auth -- certainly does. Namely, we have to override the logic the server uses to decide whether to send a CertificateRequest, how to select a trust anchor to validate the Certificate, and how to handle application data. We don't want to authorize HTTP requests from a crawler that would otherwise require a different client identity.

Given the WG feedback so far, I think we'll need to discuss this here. If you'd rather do it in a separate PR, then feel free to just leave a TODO here.

Reviewer: Filed https://github.com/jhoyla/draft-jhoyla-req-mtls-flag/issues/6.

messages in the wild. A client sending the `request_mtls` flag in the `ClientHello`
allows the server to request authentication during the initial handshake only
when it receives a hint the client will handle the request without terminating
the connection, and, if unable to authenticate, by sending an empty certificate
message, per {{?RFC8446, Section 4.4.2}}. This enables a number of use cases,
for example allowing bots to authenticate themselves when mixed in with general
traffic.

This flag is intended to be used by clients sending automated traffic, not those
that are directly operated by (human) users. Clients that set this flag SHOULD
only do so when a client certificate is directly available to them, and MUST NOT
prompt the user or take actions that would prompt the user for example trying to
read certificates from off-board devices such as smart cards.

# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Flag specification

The `request_mtls` flag is sent by the client in the `ClientHello` message,
and, if accepted by the server, acknowledged in the server's
`CertificateRequest` message. A server that receives this flag and wishes to

> accept the extension MUST send a `CertificateRequest` message with the TLS

Reviewer: How does the client handle the flag if it appears in a different message? Ideally the TLS Flags extension specifies the behavior in this case, but I'm not sure.

Author: IIUC the behaviour specified in the TLS Flags draft is a fatal `illegal_parameter` alert. 
> An endpoint that receives an unsolicited flag in another message (HRR, SH, EE, or CT) MUST generate a fatal illegal_parameter alert.
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-tls-tlsflags-15#section-3-6
I'll add text making this explicit.

Flags extension, and with the `request_mtls` flag set. The server MAY send a
`CertificateRequest` message without the `request_mtls` flag set if it wishes

> to negotiate client authentication for another reason. The client sending this

Reviewer: Is this saying the server's acknowledgement (in the "TLS Flags" sense) is optional? If so, isn't the server's behavior here the same as if it doesn't implement the req mTLS flag?

I think the phrase "wishes to negotiate client authentication for another reason" is throwing me. Am I right that you're just specifying behavior of servers that don't support this flag?

flag MUST send a `Certificate` message if it receives a `CertificateRequest`
with the `request_mtls` flag set, even if said `Certificate` message is empty,
and SHOULD NOT preemptively terminate the connection anticipating a

> "certificate_required" alert.

Reviewer: The SHOULD NOT fills me with pause. As I understand it, the goal of this flag is to express to the server that the client will handle the CR in a specific way: respond with an (empty) CT. Is there a legitimate reason why a client might ignore this SHOULD NOT?

Author: Yes. If the server sets the `certificate_authorities` extension, and only lists authorities that the client doesn't support, ditto with `signature_algorithms`. Also, the client may wish to terminate the connection for another reason (e.g. server cert didn't verify), so we shouldn't require them to continue.
